Bond BHCIP Program Update In March 2024, California voters passed Proposition 1,
that includes the Behavioral Health Services Act ( Senate Bill 326) and the
Behavioral Health Infrastructure Bond Act (BHIBA) of 2024 (Assembly Bill 531),
authorizing DHCS to make additional BHCIP grant funding available to eligible
entities. The BHIBA is a $6.38 billion general obligation bond to develop a wide
range of behavioral health treatment, residential care settings, and supportive
housing to help provide appropriate care facilities for Californians
experiencing mental health conditions and substance use disorders. Of the total
bond amount, DHCS is authorized to award up to $4.393 billion “to
construct,acquire, and rehabilitate real estate assets or to invest in needed
infrastructure to expand the continuum of behavioral health treatment resources
to build new capacity or expand existing capacity for short-term crisis
stabilization, acute and subacute care, crisis residential, community-based ment
al health residential, substance use disorder residential, peer respite,
community and outpatient behavioral health services, and other clinically
enriched longer term treatment and rehabilitation options for persons with
behavioral health disorders in the least restrictive and least costly setting.”4
Of these funds, $1.5 billion of competitive grant funding will be exclusively
available to cities, counties, city and counties, and Tribal entities and $30
million shall be specifically designated to Tribal entities. The balance of the
funds, up to $2.893 billion, is available to cities, counties, Tribal entities,
and nonprofit and for-profit organizations. The BHCIP portion of the bond is
estimated to fund 6,800 residential treatment beds and 26,700 outpatient
treatment slots for behavioral health and will build on other major behavioral
health initiatives in California. Additional bond funding requirements will be
available with the release of the RFAs. The Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) will oversee t he remaining BHIBA available funding – up to $2
billion in total.There will be a separate Notice of Funding Availability for
that portion of the BHIBA.BHCIP to Date DHCS was authorized through 2021
legislation to establish BHCIP and award $2.2 billion to construct, acquire, and
expand properties and invest in mobile crisis infrastructure related to
behavioral health. DHCS has been releasing these funds through multiple grant
rounds targeting various gaps in the state’s behavioral health facility
infrastructure. Forty-nine counties have been awarded BHCIP funding through
Round 1 to Round 5. BHCIP funding rounds: ●Round 1: Mobile Crisis,
$205 million ($55 million Substance Abuse and Mental HealthServices
Administration grant funding)●Round 2: County and Tribal Planning Grants, $16
million●Round 3: Launch Ready, $518.5 million●Round 4: Children and Youth,
$480.5 million●Round 5: Crisis and Behavioral Health Continuum, $430
million4AB-531, The Behavioral Health Infrastructure Bond Act of 2023.

[](https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=202320240SB326 "https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=202320240SB326")

[](https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=202320240AB531 "https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=202320240AB531")

[](https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes_displayText.xhtml?lawCode=WIC&division=5.&title=&part=7.&chapter=1.&article= "https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes_displayText.xhtml?lawCode=WIC&division=5.&title=&part=7.&chapter=1.&article=")

[](https://www.infrastructure.buildingcalhhs.com/bhcip-data-dashboards/ "https://www.infrastructure.buildingcalhhs.com/bhcip-data-dashboards/")

[](https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billCompareClient.xhtml?bill_id=202320240AB531&showamends=false "https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billCompareClient.xhtml?bill_id=202320240AB531&showamends=false")

[](https://file+.vscode-resource.vscode-cdn.net/Users/ojeromyo/.cursor/extensions/cweijan.vscode-office-3.5.4/resource/pdf/#%5B%7B%22num%22%3A7%2C%22gen%22%3A0%7D%2C%7B%22name%22%3A%22XYZ%22%7D%2C0%2C84%2Cnull%5D)

4 Bond BHCIP Program Update Technical Assistance As consistent with previous
BHCIP rounds of funding, Advocates for Human Potential, Inc. (AHP),a consulting
and research firm focused on improving health and human services systems, is
serving as the administrative entity for BHCIP and will be assisting in
technical assistance (TA) provisions. Beginning in May 2024, AHP will hold
virtual webinars and learning collaboratives to assist in application
preparation. These events will review various project-related topics. TA will
help applicants understand the minimum project requirements and budgeting
practices. Minimum project requirements include a sustainable business plan, a
conceptual site plan, architectural and engineering narratives, and an initial
budget based on the site plan. By November 2024 and as part of t he RFA process,
AHP will provide a pre-application consultation (PAC) to applicants. All
prospective applicants will be required to engage in a PAC,which will provide an
opportunity to discuss the proposed project, match requirements and potential
sources of local match, statutory and regulatory requirements, how the
projectaddresses local need/gaps and the State’s priorities, and other related
considerations. AHP will provide these PACs in coordination with experts in real
estate, finance,Tribal relations, and behavioral health, as needed. Applicants
will submit a request for a PAC and complete a survey to indicate their
understanding of the project requirements. The deadline to request a PAC will
beeight weeks before the application deadline. Following award announcements,
specialized TA will be provided to all BHCIP grantees. In addition, AHP will
offer ongoing general training and TA, including learning collaboratives and
other opportunities, for grantees throughout the life of the project. Additional
information and TA related to the RFA will be available at the Building
California website portal. AHP will also develop and update on an ongoing basis
a list of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) that will be accessible to all
prospective applicants and grantees. Eligible Entities Counties, cities, Tribal
entities (including 638s and urban Indian clinics), nonprofit organizations,and
for-profit organizations whose projects reflect the State’s priorities and align
with facility types listed in Table 1 are eligible to apply for this funding,
noting the following stipulations and specifications: ●Projects must make a
commitment to serve Medi-Cal beneficiaries.●For-profit organizations, including
private real estate developers, with related priordevelopment experience who are
collaborating with nonprofit organizations,Tribalentities, or counties may
apply, but will be required to demonstrate a legal agreement

[](https://www.buildingcalhhs.com/ "https://www.buildingcalhhs.com/")

[](https://www.buildingcalhhs.com/ "https://www.buildingcalhhs.com/")

Bond BHCIP Program Update 5 (e.g., Memorandum of Understanding [MOU]) with the
county,Tribal entity, city, for-profit organization, or nonprofit organization
to confirm the organization’s role in the project, including that they are
working on behalf of the service provider). Recipients of BHCIP awards in prior
rounds are eligible to apply. Any additional BHCIP funding awarded must be used
to further expand or create new facility capacity. To be considered,
applications must clearly explain the funding request for additional behavioral
health project expansion and how it meets the statewide need. Funding shall not
fund budget shortfalls or cost overruns for any previously awarded BHCIP
projects. Eligibility ConsiderationsAll applicants must demonstrate how their
infrastructure project will expand community-based facility capacity exclusively
for behavioral health services in the continuum of care. Regional models or
collaborative partnerships aimed at construction, renovation, and/or expansion
of community-based services are eligible, as are projects using a campus-type
model that collocates multiple levels of care on the continuum are strongly
encouraged. In addition, scoring will take into consideration a focus on the
State’s priorities, including efforts to advance equity and to expand services
in regions and counties that currently do not have an adequate number of
treatment options for behavioral health facilities. In an effort to be
consistent with the bond proposal to expand 6,800 residential treatment beds,
applicants proposing residential facilities will be prioritized for funding
award. Expanded residential treatment beds will also assist counties with the
implementation of the Community Assistance, Recovery and Empowerment (CARE)
Act.All applicants must describe the local needs based on the statewide needs
assessment report and any local needs assessment used to justify the proposed
expansion. All applicants will be required to demonstrate how the proposed
project will advance equity. Projects will be required to certify that they will
not exclude certain populations outside their mission or scope, such as those
who are justice-involved or children and youth in foster care. Grantees with
behavioral health facilities that offer Medi-Cal behavioral health services will
be required to have a contract in place with their county to ensure the
provision of Medi-Cal services once the funded facility’s expansion or
construction is complete.To be eligible for funding, a project must demonstrate
“project readiness.” At a minimum, the fundamental threshold requirements for
“project readiness” are as follows:●Site control. Any of the following may be
used to prove site control (other documentationdemonstrating site control may be
submitted for DHCS consideration):oTitle vested to applicant
(ownership)oExecuted Purchase and Sale Agreement (PSA)oMutually executed Letter
of Intent (LOI)oPre-existing long-term lease (acceptance of a BHCIP award will
require a leaseextension of no fewer than 30 years)

Bond BHCIP Program Update 6 oExecuted Exclusive Negotiation Agreement (ENA)oA
memorandum of understanding (MOU) does not constitute site control. Pleasebe
sure to discuss any other proposed site control documentation during
yourrequired pre-application consultation.●A sustainable business plan with
5-year projections within existing available funding(income and expenses) of
future objectives and strategies for achieving them.●A conceptual/schematic site
plan with a forecast of the developmental potential of theproperty. The further
the construction drawings are toward “permit ready” the higher theapplication
will be scored, all other items being equal.●Stakeholder support as demonstrated
by letters of support from internal boards ofdirectors, Tribal councils or
advisory boards, a nd professional/community partners, asrelevant. City,
nonprofit, or for-profit applicants must also include a letter of support
fromtheir county behavioral health agency.●Demonstration of county and Medi-Cal
investments to support ongoing sustainability.●Match amount and source
identified.In addition, inclusion of a professionally bid development budget,
including all local prevailing wage rates, one for each phase, and a total
budget for acquisition and construction, will increase an applicant’s score.
However, it will not guarantee an award.Three phases of project development will
be considered during the evaluation of each application. Applicants must be in
one of the three phases; applicants in later phases will be scored higher. All
projects must meet the minimum threshold of project readiness to be awarded
grant funds. Applicant projects are considered to be in a given phase of
development only after they have met all of the requirements in the previous
phase. Required documentation will be reviewed with each applicant during the
PAC process and must be submitted as part of the application.Payment processes
will be subject to the bond funding requirements that will be outlined in the
RFA. Guidance and technical assistance will be provided regarding data and
information necessary from grantees in order to comply with bond requirements.
Grantees may submit invoices for program funds as specified milestones are
achieved and related documentation is submitted to AHP. Funding will occur
through draw requests for work completed and invoiced. Funding is intended for
planning, preconstruction, permitting, and construction; allowable costs include
those activities identified in the development phases below. ●Phase 1: Planning
and pre-developmentoDevelopment team established; includes attorney, architect,
and/or design-buildteam.oSite control, defined as ownership, an executed PSA, an
executed LOI, a long-termlease, or an executed ENA.oBasis of design; includes
architectural and engineering narratives.

Bond BHCIP Program Update 7 oProperty-specific site investigation report and due
diligence.oBudget with cost estimates based on site plan/drawings.●Phase 2:
Design developmentoSite control established with deed, PSA, option contract,
LOI, or leasehold.oSite plan established with a schematic plan with
architectural and engineeringspecifications.oStakeholder support established as
demonstrated by a letter fromcity/county/board of directors/Tribal entity.oAble
to gain building permits within six months of funding.oAble to close on land and
gain building permits within six months of funding.oAble to start construction
within nine months of funding.●Phase 3: Shovel readyoOwnership of real estate
site.oPreliminary plan check completed, with comments received.oConstruction
drawings complete or near completion.oGeneral contractor (builder) selected and
ready for hire.oNinety percent of construction drawings ready for submission for
building permit.oBuilding permit ready to be issued.oAble to start construction
within 60 days or less.●Final Phase: ConstructionoProjects that rehabilitate or
renovate an existing facility are allowable as long asthey result in an
expansion of behavioral health services for the target population.oEssential
furniture and equipment are allowable costs, as per the DHCS allowableexpense
list. There is a maximum of 10 percent of the total budget allowed for
thispurpose.Full funding of a proposed development project will be contingent on
completion of all three phases of development planning. The planning and
pre-development phase, which includes the submission of construction documents
for building permit review, must be completed within six months of grant funding
award.Eligible Facility TypesThe following facility types may be considered for
project funding only if they are expanding or creating new behavioral health
infrastructure.

Bond BHCIP Program Update 8 Table 1. Eligible Facility Types BondBHCIP:Round 1
and Round 2 Eligible Facility Types Acute Psychiatric HospitalAdolescent
Residential SUD Treatment FacilityAdult Residential SUD Treatment
FacilityBehavioral Health Urgent Care (BHUC)/Mental Health Urgent Care
(MHUC)Chemical Dependency Recovery HospitalChildren’s Crisis Residential Program
(CCRP)Community Mental Health Clinic (outpatient)Community Residential Treatment
System (CRTS)/Social Rehabilitation Program (SRP)Community Treatment Facility
(CTF)Community Wellness/Prevention Center (Tribal entitiesonly)Crisis
Stabilization Unit (CSU)General Acute Care Hospital (GACH)for behavioral health
services onlyHospital-based Outpatient Treatment (outpatient
detoxification/withdrawal management)Mental Health Rehabilitation Center
(MHRC)Narcotic Treatment Program (NTP)NTP Medication UnitOffice-based Opioid
TreatmentOutpatient Treatment for SUDPartial Hospitalization ProgramPeer
RespitePerinatal Residential SUD FacilitiesPsychiatric Health Facility
(PHF)Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility (PRTF)Short-term Residential
Therapeutic Program (STRTP)Skilled Nursing Facility with Special Treatment
Program (SNF/STP)Sobering Center (funded under the Drug Medi-Cal Organized
Delivery System [DMC-ODS] and/or Community Supports)Social Rehabilitation
Facilities (SRFs)For purposes of this funding, a Behavioral Health Urgent Care
(BHUC) facility, also known as Mental Health Urgent Care (MHUC), is a walk-in
center with voluntary stabilization-oriented services specific to individuals
experiencing behavioral health or mental health crisis for less than 24 hours.
This community-based option is typically designed to provide an alternative to
emergency department visits for urgent medical needs. BHUCs/MHUCs must focus on
serving individuals in need of crisis services, commit to serving Medi-Cal
beneficiaries, and offer some or all of the following:●Multi-disciplinary health
assessment●Psychiatric evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment●Crisis stabilization
and intervention, mental health counseling, and medication evaluation

Bond BHCIP Program Update 9 ●Direct referrals for treatment of care●Linkage to
community-based solutions●Peer supportFacility types that are not eligible for
funding:●Correctional settings●SchoolsApplicants will be expected to define the
types of facilities they will operate and explain how they will expand service
capacity exclusively for community-based behavioral health facilities. Funding
Parameters Applicants will be expected to develop a competitive and itemized
professional development budget for all development costs, including legal,
insurance, permits and fees and performance and payment bonds, that will be
scored alongside applications for projects of similar setting types and sizes.
In addition, scoring will take into consideration the speed of project delivery
and operations, with a focus on the State’s priorities, including efforts to
advance equity and to expand services in regions and counties that currently do
not have an adequate number of treatment options for behavioral health
facilities. DHCS, AHP, and its subcontractors will conduct a financial viability
assessment, considering continued fluctuations in construction and other costs.
Through various TA activities, such as the PAC, interviews, and financial
document review, the State will assess long-term operational sustainability once
the capital project is complete and in use for its intended purpose.Post Award
ExpectationsGrantees must commit to executing BHCIP contracts within 90 days of
receipt of conditional award notice. Failure to fully execute contracts within
the required timeframe may result in rescinding BHCIP funding awards. DHCS will
not accept any redlines to the contract. Encumbrance and Use
RestrictionsApplicants will be required to commit to operating services in the
financed facility for the intended purpose for a minimum of 30 years within
existing funding for behavioral health services. BHCIP funding cannot be used to
fund services. The approved building use restriction will be detailed in the
written contract. Match Mandatory match guidelines are required by statute and
will be set according to applicant type.

Bond BHCIP Program Update 10 Project Funding Awarded Local Government and
Nonprofit OrganizationFor-Profit Organizationunder $150 million10 percent 25
percent above $150 million 10 percent 25 percent Higher priority for
applicantsthat include a higher local matchTribal entities (regardless of
funding awarded) = 5 percent match. Match in the form of cash and in-kind
contributions—such as land or existing structures—to the real costs of the
project will be allowed. The State must approve the match source. Cash may come
from: ●Local funding;•Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) funds from Community
Services and Supports andCapital Facilities and Technological Needs (CFTN)
components;●Behavioral Health Services Act (BHSA) funds from the Behavioral
Health Services andSupports;●Foundation/philanthropic support;●Opioid settlement
funds for SUD facilities;●Loans or investments;●Incentive payments from managed
care plans; or●Another source.Services, Behavioral Health Subaccount funding,
and State general funds will not be allowed as match.Funding RegionsRegional
funding caps will be established and the amounts available per region will be
determined based on the Behavioral Health Subaccount. In Bond BHCIP Round 1:
Launch Ready, the $1.5 billion available exclusively for County, City, and
Tribal entities will not be subject to a regional funding cap. The remaining
BHCIP funding will be subject to the regional funding capsand as outlined below.
In addition, for the Bond BHCIP Round 1: Launch Ready up to $1.8 billion and
Bond BHCIP Round 2: Unmet Needs up to $1.1 billion will be available for all
eligible entities, 20 percent of funds available for BHCIP will be set aside for
use in regions at the State’s discretion to ensure funding is effectively
aligned with need. (For example, this reserve money may be used to fund
high-scoring projects in oversubscribed regions.)

[](https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/services/MH/Pages/MH_Prop63.aspx "https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/services/MH/Pages/MH_Prop63.aspx")

[](https://oag.ca.gov/opioids "https://oag.ca.gov/opioids")

Bond BHCIP Program Update 11 Following an initial round of regional funding
allocations, DHCS will conduct periodic reviews of the number of completed
applications from each region. If an insufficient number of competitive
applications is received and awarded within a region, the remaining funding will
be awarded at the discretion of DHCS or shifted to the remaining Bond BHCIP
Round.Table 2. Bond BHCIP Round 1 (2024): Launch Ready - Regional & Statewide
Funding _Of the $1.5B, a minimum of $30M shall be designated to Tribal entities
as required by statute.1. Regions for All Eligible Entity FundsSub-Total
Available to Regions for All Eligible Entities:
$1.8   billionLos Angeles County$479,190,226Bay Area:Alameda, Contra Costa,
Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Solano,
Sonoma$278,108,183Southern California:Imperial, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego, Ventura$263,680,311San
Joaquin Valley:Fresno, Kern, Kings, Madera, Merced, San Joaquin, Stanislaus,
Tulare$154,666,275Sacramento Area:El Dorado, Placer, Sacramento, Sutter, Yolo, Yuba$81,768,565Central
Coast: Monterey, San Benito, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Santa
Cruz$51,771,065Balance of State:Alpine, Amador, Butte, Calaveras, Colusa, Del Norte, Glenn, Humboldt, Inyo, Lake, Lassen, Mariposa, Mendocino, Modoc, Mono, Nevada, Plumas, Shasta, Sierra, Siskiyou, Tehama, Trinity, Tuolumne$58,815,375Tribal$90,000,000Discretionary:The discretionary set-aside may also be used to fund high-scoring projects in regions that have met their funding reserve$342,000,0002.No
Regional Caps for County, City, and Tribal ( only) FundsSub-Total Available
Statewide for County, City, and Tribal_: $1.5billion Total for Bond BHCIP Round
1: Launch ReadyUp to $3.3 billion

Bond BHCIP Program Update 12 Table 3. Bond BHCIP Round 2 (2025): Unmet Needs -
Regional Funding Cap - ProjectionsRegions for All Eligible Entity FundsSub-Total
Available to Regions for All Eligible Entities: Up to
$1.1   billionLos Angeles County$292,838,472Bay Area:Alameda, Contra Costa,
Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Solano,
Sonoma$169,955,001Southern California:Imperial, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego, Ventura$161,137,968San
Joaquin Valley:Fresno, Kern, Kings, Madera, Merced, San Joaquin, Stanislaus,
Tulare$94,518,279Sacramento Area: El Dorado, Placer, Sacramento, Sutter, Yolo, Yuba$49,969,678Central
Coast: Monterey, San Benito, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Santa
Cruz$31,637,873Balance of State:Alpine, Amador, Butte, Calaveras, Colusa, Del Norte, Glenn, Humboldt, Inyo, Lake, Lassen, Mariposa, Mendocino, Modoc, Mono, Nevada, Plumas, Shasta, Sierra, Siskiyou, Tehama, Trinity, Tuolumne$35,942,729Tribal$55,000,000Discretionary:The discretionary set-aside may also be used to fund high-scoring projects in regions that have met their funding reserve$209,000,000*Total
award amount available contingent on bond administrative costs utilized as
outlined in statute.Total for Bond BHCIP Rounds1 and 2Up to $4.4billionTotal for
Bond BHCIP Round 2: Unmet NeedsUp to $1.1 billion
