**Bond Behavioral Health Continuum Infrastructure Program**

**(BHCIP) Round 1: Launch Ready**

**Informational Webinar**

**Kelly Cowger, Branch Chief**

**Community Services Division/Behavioral Health Expansion Branch, DHCS**

**Holly Clifton, Section Chief**

**Community Services Division/BHCIP Policy and Program Monitoring Section,
DHCS**

**Laurice Artap, Section Chief**

**Community Services Division/BHCIP Fiscal and Contract Monitoring Section,
DHCS**

**Mark Faucette, Senior Director**

**Advocates for Human Potential, Inc.**

**August 7, 2024****Today's Agenda**

****1 **Proposition 1**

****2 **Statewide Needs Assessment and Initiatives**

****3 **BHCIP Guiding Principles and Priorities**

****4 **Bond BHCIP Round 1: Launch Ready**

**5 Application ProcessWelcoming Remarks**

**Kelly Cowger**

**Branch Chief**

**Behavioral Health**

**Expansion Branch,**

**Community Services**

**Division, Department**

**of Health Care**

**Services****State Map**

**BHCIP Awards**

**Round 1: Crisis Care Mobile Units**

**Round 2: Planning Grants**

**Round 3: Launch Ready**

**Round 4: Children and Youth**

**Round 5: Crisis and Behavioral Health Continuum**

**Point in time data as of July 2024.Proposition 1**

**5****Behavioral Health Transformation**

**In March 2024, California voters passed Proposition 1, a two-bill package to
modernize the state’s**

**behavioral health care system, improve accountability and increase
transparency, and expand the capacity**

**of behavioral health care facilities for Californians.**

****Behavioral Health Services Act ** (SB 326)**

**Behavioral Health Infrastructure Bond Act**

**of 2024 (BHIBA)** (AB 531)****

****• **Reforming behavioral health care funding to**

**provide services to those with the most serious**

**mental illnesses and treat substance use disorders.**

****• **Expanding the behavioral health workforce to reflect**

**and connect with California’s diverse population.**

****• **Focusing on outcomes, accountability, and equity.**

****• **Funding behavioral health treatment beds,**

**supportive housing, and community sites.**

****• **Directs funding for housing for veterans with**

**behavioral health needs.BHIBA and DHCS**

**The BHIBA portion is a $6.38 billion general obligation bond to develop an
array**

**of behavioral health treatment, residential care settings, and supportive
housing**

**to help provide appropriate care facilities for individuals experiencing
mental**

**health and substance use disorders.**

**DHCS was authorized to award up to $4.4 billion in BHIBA funds for BHCIP**

**competitive grants to expand behavioral health facility infrastructure. Of
these**

**funds, $1.5 billion will be awarded only to counties, cities, and tribal
entities,**

**with $30 million set aside for tribal entities.Statewide Needs**

**Assessment**

**and Initiatives**

**8****DHCS Needs Assessment**

**Released by DHCS on January 10, 2022**

**1**

**2**

**Needs assessment to provide data and stakeholder perspectives for DHCS as it**

**implements major behavioral health initiatives and expands the behavioral
health**

**infrastructure through BHCIP**

**“Assessing the Continuum of Care for Behavioral Health Services in
California”**

**3BHCIP Guiding**

**Principles and**

**Priorities**

**10****Bond BHCIP Guiding Principles and Priorities**

**Address**

**urgent needs in the care continuum for people with mental health or substance
use conditions, including**

**unhoused people, veterans, older adults, adults with disabilities, and
children and youth.**

**Invest**

**in behavioral health and community care options that advance health equity of
behavioral health care and**

**community options.**

**Increase**

**options across the life span that serve as an alternative to incarceration,
hospitalization, homelessness, and**

**institutionalization.**

***continued*Bond BHCIP Guiding Principles and Priorities**

**Meet**

**the needs of vulnerable populations with the greatest barriers to access,
including people experiencing**

**unsheltered homelessness and justice involvement**

**Ensure**

**care can be provided in the least restrictive settings to support community
integration, choice, and**

**autonomy.**

**Leverage**

**county and Medi-Cal investments to support ongoing sustainability.**

**Leverage**

**the historic state investments in housing and homelessness.Bond BHCIP Round:
1**

**Launch Ready**

**13****Bond BHCIP Round 1: Launch Ready**

**1 2 3**

**Up to $3.3 billion in competitive**

**grants to construct, acquire, and**

**rehabilitate facilities that will**

**expand service capacity for**

**behavioral health**

**facility infrastructure**

**Eligible entities: counties, cities,**

**tribal entities (including urban**

**Indian clinics), nonprofit**

**organizations, for-profit**

**organizations**

**DHCS is prioritizing:**

**• Regional models or**

**collaborative partnerships,**

**including public-private**

**partnership**

**• Campus-type models that**

**collocate multiple levels of**

**care on the continuum, with a**

**focus on residential treatment**

**facilities****For-Profit Organizations (RFA Section 2.1—Eligible Applicants)**

**For-profit organizations with**

**no prior behavioral health**

**experience must partner with**

**another eligible entity with**

**relevant experience.**

**A memorandum of**

**understanding (MOU) or other**

**agreement to confirm the**

**organization’s role in**

**the project, including that they**

**are working on behalf of the**

**service provider, is required.Eligible Facility Types –**

**Inpatient/Residential (RFA Section 2.4)**

**• Acute Psychiatric Hospital**

**• Adolescent Residential SUD Treatment Facility**

**• Adult Residential SUD Treatment Facility**

**• Chemical Dependency Recovery Hospital**

**• Children’s Crisis Residential Program (CCRP)**

**• Community Residential Treatment System (CRTS)/Social Rehabilitation Program
(SRP)**

**• Community Treatment Facility (CTF)**

**• General Acute Care Hospital (GACH) for behavioral health services only**

****(continued)**Eligible Facility Types –**

**Inpatient/Residential (RFA Section 2.4)**

**• Mental Health Rehabilitation Center (MHRC)**

**• Peer Respite**

**• Perinatal Residential SUD Facility**

**• Psychiatric Health Facility (PHF)**

**• Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility (PRTF)**

**• Short-term Residential Therapeutic Program (STRTP)**

**• Skilled Nursing Facility with Special Treatment Program (SNF/STP)**

**• Social Rehabilitation Facility (SRF)**

***Correctional facilities and schools are NOT eligible. Eligible Facility Types
–**

**Outpatient (RFA Section 2.4)**

**• Behavioral Health Urgent Care (BHUC)/Mental Health Urgent Care (MHUC)**

**• Community Mental Health Clinic**

**• Community Wellness/Prevention Center (Tribal entities only)**

**• Crisis Stabilization Unit (CSU)**

**• Hospital-based Outpatient Treatment (outpatient detoxification/**

**withdrawal management)**

**• Narcotic Treatment Program (NTP)**

**• NTP Medication Unit**

**• Office-based Opioid Treatment (OBOT)**

**• Outpatient Treatment for SUD**

**• Partial Hospitalization Program (PHP)**

**• Sobering Center (funded under the Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System
and/or**

**Community SupportsFunding**

**Regions (RFA**

**Section 3.1)**

***Of the $1.5B, a minimum of**

**$30M shall be designated**

**for tribal entities, as**

**required by statute.Project Phases (RFA Section 2.2)**

**Phase 1: Planning and pre-development**

**Phase 2: Design development**

**Phase 3: Shovel ready**

**Final Phase: Construction**

**All applicants must meet minimum threshold requirements for**

****“project readiness.”**Encumbrance and Use Restrictions (RFA Section 2.6)**

**1**

**2**

**Applicants will be required to commit to**

**operating services in the financed**

**facility for a minimum of 30 years.**

**Project property assessor’s parcel**

**number(s) (APN[s]) will be**

**encumbered with a Declaration of**

**Restrictions and a Performance Deed of**

****Trust for 30 years.**County and Stakeholder Support:**

**All Applicants (RFA Section 2.1)**

**• Form 7: Community Engagement**

**• City, nonprofit, or for-profit applicants must include a letter of support
from their county**

**behavioral health agency or, if a Tribal entity, the Tribal board**

**• For additional guidance, Letters of Support guidelines can be found in
Attachment C in the**

**RFAMatch**

**23****What Is Match?**

**The amount of money, real**

**property, or sunk costs a**

**project owner must deposit**

**into an individual development**

**account, based on a**

**percentage of total project**

**costs, as defined by the**

**leading entity type.**

**All match amounts must be**

**well documented and will be**

**reviewed and approved by**

**DHCS and AHP prior to the**

**awarding of funds.**

**Services, Behavioral Health**

**Subaccount funding, and State**

**general funds are not permitted**

****sources of match.**Match Requirements (RFA Section 2.7)**

****Project Funding Awarded **Local Government and**

****Nonprofit Organization **For-Profit Organization**

**Under $150 million 10 percent 25 percent**

**10 percent 25 percent**

**Above $150 million**

**Higher priority for applicants that include a higher local match**

**Tribal entities (regardless of funding awarded) = 5 percent match.Cash Match
(Strongest Form of Match)**

**• Local funding;**

**• Mental Health Services Act (MHSA) funds from Community Services and Supports
and**

**Capital Facilities and Technological Needs (CFTN) components;**

**• Behavioral Health Services Act (BHSA) funds from the Behavioral Health
Services and**

**Supports;**

**• Foundation/philanthropic support;**

**• Opioid settlement funds for SUD facilities;**

**• Loans or investments;**

**• Incentive payments from managed care plans; or**

****• Another source.**Bond Requirements**

**27****Bond Funding Requirements**

**Funding Timeline**

**Two opportunities every year to request funding for anticipated expenditure
needs**

****• **Spring Bond Survey**

****• **Fall Bond Survey**

**48-Year Record Retention Requirement**

**Project Progress and Funding Expenditure ReportingBond Timeline**

**Anticipated Award**

**Announcement**

**May**

**Spring 2025 Bond**

**Funding Available**

**June**

**Fall 2025 Bond Sale Period**

**September – November**

**December**

**2024**

**2025 2026**

**October April May June July August September November December**

**March**

**January**

**Spring 2025 Bond Sale**

**Period**

**March – May**

**Fully Executed Sponsor Program**

**Funding Agreement (PFA)**

**September**

**Fall Bond Survey Due**

**Beginning of June**

**Application Due Date**

**December 13, 2024**

**Fall 2025 Bond**

**Funding Available**

**January****Advocates for Human Potential, Inc.**

**The administrative entity for**

**BHCIP.**

**Provide technical assistance**

**with our real estate and**

**finance teams.**

**Provide pre-application**

**consultations and technical**

**assistance (TA) to all**

**BHCIP applicants beginning**

**this month, as well as training**

**and TA throughout the life of**

**the projects.**

**Consulting and**

**research firm with**

**over 35 years’**

**experience improving**

**health and human**

**services systems.**

**Provide system, program**

**development, workforce and**

**resource development**

****and dissemination.**Application Process**

**31****Application Timeline**

**Request for Applications (RFA) release Informational Webinar**

**Tribal informational webinar**

**Application portal opens**

**Deadline to schedule a required pre-application consultation (PAC)**

**PAC window**

**Office Hours (recommended PAC be completed first)**

**Application deadline**

**Award announcements**

**July 17, 2024**

**August 7, 2024, 1:00 p.m. PT**

**August 8, 2024, 2:00 p.m. PT**

**August 9, 2024**

**October 15, 2024**

**August 9-November 14, 2024**

**Wednesdays/Thursdays, 10:00 a.m. PT through**

**December 13, 2024**

**December 13, 2024, 5:00 p.m. PT**

**no exceptions**

****May 2025 (anticipated)**Pre-Application Consultation (PAC) (RFA Section
3.2)**

**Follow these steps to schedule a PAC**

**Request a PAC through**

**SurveyMonkey Apply**.****

**An email from**

**bondbhcipround1@**

**ahpnet.com will include a**

**link to the Microsoft**

**Bookings landing page,**

**where you can select a**

**convenient date and time**

**for your PAC.**

**Applicants scheduling on**

**behalf of a city and/or a**

**county or a tribal entity**

**should do so by selecting**

**either “City/County**

**Specific” or “Tribal.”**

**Complete the booking**

**questions.**

**Once you have met with your Technical Assistance Specialist and completed a
PAC, you will be able to access the full**

**Bond BHCIP Round 1: Launch Ready application through SurveyMonkey
Apply.Pre-Application Consultation Request FormTips for Applying**

**• Donot share login credentials with others in your**

**organization. Instead, add collaborators by selecting "Add**

**Collaborator" on the left pane of the application, as shown.**

**• Be sure to save your application often.**

**• You will be prompted to provide all required attachments once you**

**have completed the application questions.**

**• Once you have completed the application, be sure to click the**

**"Submit" button.**

**• MAKE SURE THAT BUDGET AMOUNTS ARE IDENTICAL**

**ACROSS ALL APPLICATION QUESTIONS AND DOCUMENTS.**

**• Please reach out to your AHP Technical Assistance Specialist with**

**any additional questions.Required Documents**

**• Form 2: Budget**

**• Form 3: Development Team Information**

**• Form 4: Design, Acquisition, and Construction Milestone Schedule**

**• Form 5: Applicant’s Certification of Prevailing Wage**

**• Form 6: Applicant’s Certification of Funding Terms**

**• Form 7: Community Engagement**

**• Form 8: Schematic Design Checklist**

**• Form 9: Facility Financial Operating Pro Forma Template**

**• Form 10: Board Authorizing Resolution (BAR)**

**• Drawings: preliminary site plans, design drawings, or construction
drawings**

**• Resumes: Development team or developer who created the design/construction**

**plans**

**• Contracts: A copy of all executed contracts for hire related to your
project’s**

**development team**

***Note: Form 1 is application questions for reference guide onlyReasons for
Disqualification**

**1.**

**The applicant does not request a pre-application consultation by the October
15, 2024,**

**deadline (see section 1.4).**

**2.**

**The application is received after the application submission deadline of
December 13, 2024,**

**5:00 p.m. PT. Submit early to avoid technical issues (see section 1.4 for
timeline).**

**3.**

**The application is incomplete or missing required information or forms, and/or
does not**

**include a complete development budget (see section 2.8).**

**4.**

**The proposed facility is not on the list of eligible facility types in the RFA
(section 2.4).**

**5.**

**The project fails to meet Eligibility Considerations (see section 2.2).
Post-Award Process**

****• **Clear title to the**

**property.**

****• **Complete**

**execution of the**

**Program Funding**

**Agreement (PFA)**

**within 90 days of**

**receipt.**

****• **Execute a Facility**

**Access**

**Agreement (FAA).**

****• **Provide a signed**

**opinion letter from**

**legal counsel**

**stating that the**

**PFA, including**

**real estate**

**instruments,**

**along with the**

**program**

**requirements, is**

**not in conflict with**

**any existing**

**contract or**

**agreement related**

**to the property,**

**project, or**

**conditional**

**grantee.**

****• **Important Notes**

****• **The PFA must**

**be signed,**

**returned, and**

**fully executed**

**with**

**DHCS/AHP**

**before initial**

**funding will**

**begin.**

****• **DHCS will not**

**accept any**

**changes,**

**negotiations,**

**or redlining to**

****the PFA.**For More Information**

**Bond BHCIP Round 1: Launch Ready**

**• Visit the BHCIP website**

**• Email bondbhcipround1@ahpnet.com**

**• Tribal informational webinar on August 8,**

**2024, at 2:00 p.m.**

**Behavioral Health Transformation**

**• Visit the BHT website**

**• Email BHTInfo@dhcs.ca.govThank you!**
