```
Title: Microsoft Word - manuscript_corrected_22102023.docx

URL Source: http://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.14439

Markdown Content:
# Towards the automation of book typesetting 

Sérgio M. Rebelo a* , Tiago Martins a* , Diogo Ferreira a* , Artur Rebelo a 

> a

University of Coimbra, Centre for Informatics and Systems of the University of 

Coimbra, Department of Informatics Engineering, Coimbra, Portugal 

Abstract 

This paper proposes a generative approach for the automatic typesetting of books in 

desktop publishin g. The presented system consists in a computer script that operates 

inside a widely used design software tool and implements a generative process based 

on several typographic rules, styles and principles which have been identified in the 

literature. The pe rformance of the proposed system is tested through an experiment 

which included the evaluation of its outputs with people. The results reveal the ability 

of the system to consistently create varied book designs from the same input content 

as well as visual ly coherent book designs with different contents while complying 

with fundamental typographic principles. 

Keywords 

Design tools ; Data -driven Design ; Generative Design; Graphic design ; Typography . 

> *

Corresponding authors. 

Email addresses: srebelo@dei.uc.pt (Sérgio M. Rebelo), tiagofm@dei.uc.pt (Tiago 

Martins), df@diogoferreira.com (Diogo Ferreira) 1

# 1. Introduction 

Typography is the art of giving our language a visual form. Thus, it is through 

typography that we materialise and store our knowledge and information [1] . Since 

the publication of the first typographic book, in the mid -fifteenth century, society has 

been looking for the most appropriate way to convey a message typographically . In 

the field of editorial design, this effort has focused on the search for the best 

principles for designing typographic compositions, such as books [2] .

Advances in digital technologies have been changing the work process of graphic 

designers. The emer gence of computational approaches in the design domain enabled 

designers to explore new perspectives, new conceptual and visual possibilities, and 

achieve new types of solutions. Furthermore, the emergence of computational 

approaches comes with a paradigm shift in the role of the designer, who begins to 

create processes that enable the creation of designs, instead of designing the final 

solution. In other words, the design concept is translated into a computer program that 

systematically explores various de sign possibilities from the original concept. That 

said, in the particular case of layout design, we consider that the potential of 

computational approaches is not yet being fully explored. 

In this work, we explore a computational generative approach for t he automatic 

design of book layouts. The result is a computer system, which operates inside the 

Adobe InDesign environment, that automatically generates book designs from input 

content. Figure 1 shows different books created with the presented system. It s tarts by 

receiving the input content, namely text and images. Before generating compositions 

for the input content, the designer can specify restrictions on some of the visual 

characteristics of the output compositions, e.g. format, size, grid and font. Th en, the 

system automatically typesets the content based on a set of typography rules and 

principles found in fundamental literature in the field. In the end, the system presents 

the generated composition to the user as an editable Adobe InDesign document. 

Overall, the system is capable of creating layout compositions that comply with 

specific fundamental typographic principles while matching the graphic preferences 

of the user. In addition, experiments conducted with the system demonstrate its 

ability to au tonomously generate varied compositions with the same input content and 

also generate visually coherent compositions for different input contents. In addition, 

it creates functional layout designs in an almost unpredictable manner. This reveals 

the great p otential of this approach to layout design, both in generating outputs that 2

the designer uses as final solutions and in using the outputs as starting points for 

further explorations. This work is aligned with the experiments previously developed 

by Ferreir a et al. [3]  

> Figure 1. Examples of books generated with the presented system. All designs generated by the system
> for this paper, along with demonstration videos, can be found in the supplementary files.

The remaining of the article is organised as follo ws: Section 2 overviews related 

works; Section 3 describes the system, namely the interaction process, the engine that 

runs the system, as well as its inputs and outputs; Section 4 presents an experiment 

conducted to validate the designs created with the s ystem and discusses the results 

obtained; Lastly, Section 5 summarises the main contributions of this work and 

identifies future work. 

# 2. Computational Approaches in Editorial Design 

Systematic approaches have been popular in layout design since the mid -twentieth 

century when some creative practitioners designed layouts based on grids and the 

variation of the visual features of typographic elements [4 –6] . Some works have 

explored algor ithmic approaches for book layout design. In the 1960s, Gerstner 

introduced a selective and combinatorial method for the design of graphics, including 

layouts [7] . Afterwards, he translated it into a logical language that computers could 

understand in Comp endium for Literates: A system of Writing [8] . LeWitt compiled, 3

in 1971, a set of formal instructions to design a conceptual art exhibition catalogue 

[9] . Already in the 1980s, Knuth and Plass [10] presented a dynamic programming 

algorithm to page breaks a voiding widows and orphans and employed it to typeset a 

two -column dictionary. Soon thereafter, Knuth introduced the parametric typeface 

design language, Metafont [11] and the TeX typesetting system [12] , enabling 

anybody to produce a book using a structur al markup language and a set of high -level 

commands. Cooper and her students, at the Visible Language Workshop, 

experimented with the generation of layouts, e.g. publications that resulted from the 

collaboration with IBM [13] and the cover for Design Quart erly 142 [14] . In the mid -

1990s, Maeda also designed a series of digital booklets, the Reactive Book series, 

where the graphics are controlled interactively by user input [15] .

Nevertheless, in the last two decades, we observed the increasing employment of the 

use of computational graphic design approaches, especially because of the 

development of easier -to -use creative code environments [16,17] . A solid overview 

of the field is presented, for instance, by Reas et al. [6] or Richardson [18] . These 

approache s have been explored in several artistic and creative domains, including the 

generation of visual and communication artefacts such as poster designs ( e.g. Rebelo 

et al. [19] or Guo et al. [20] ), banners ( e.g. Gatarski [21] or Yin et al. [22] ), user 

interfaces ( e.g. Quiroz et al. [23] or Amitani et al. [24] ), visual identities ( e.g. Levin 

[25] or Neue [26] ), type designs ( e.g. Ahn & Jin [27] or Martins et al. [28] ), among 

others. In the context of book typesetting, two frameworks are stimulating the 

adoption of computational practices. The library Basil.js [29] provides friendly and 

accessible tools for scripting and automation in Adobe InDesign. Then, the open -

source framework The Magic Book [30] facilitates the design, production, and self -

publishing of books. 

Tailor -made procedural and template -based approaches are employed in the 

generation and definition of layouts, modification of layouts based on their contents 

and/or inter -relationships between the elements. LettError type design studio used 

ra ndom processes and parametric design methods to design several typographic 

artefacts such as calendars, type specimens and even their portfolio [31,32] . Oliveira 

[33] presented a recursive division method to place elements on both one and 

multiple -column g rid layouts. Cleveland [34] proposed a method for generating style -

based design layouts that explores the inter -relationships between text and graphics. 

Also, he presented a system to generate layouts employing these principles. LUST 

developed a set of scr ipts to layout and stylise the book “I Read Where I am” 

informed by its content [35] . Damera -Venkata et al. [36] presented a template -based 4

probabilistic framework for generating document layouts for variable content. 

Ahmadullin and Damera -Venkata [37] als o presented a probabilistic model for 

newspaper typeset that, based on given content, divides the available layout into 

regions and optimises the content to fit within these regions. Flipboard developed 

Duplo [38] , a layout engine that creates news magazin es adapted to its contents and 

based on a set of heuristics such as the amount and flux of text or the existence and 

position of images. 

We can also observe the use of Artificial Intelligence approaches for typesetting. 

Evolutionary computation and greedy approaches have been used to create layouts 

with varied purposes. For example, Geigel and Loui [39] evolved layouts for photo 

books by evaluating different aesthetic criteria. Goldenberg [40] employed an 

evolutionary approach to automatically generate page layouts, minimising the waste 

of space on the page. Gonzalvez et al. [41] used a greedy simulated annealing 

algorithm to create multi -column newspaper layouts. Purvis et al. [42] automatically 

evolved documents using a multi -objective optimisation approach, considering a set 

of layout constraints and aesthetic measures. Quiroz et al. [43] evolved brochure 

documents according to user preferences and design guidelines. Strecker and Hennig 

[44] proposed a grid -based method for newspaper layouts, minimising the wasted 

space and bearing in mind newspaper design aesthetic measures. Bol l et al. [45] and 

Sandhaus et al. [46,47] evolved photo layouts based on rules of layout design and 

proposed a method to transform a blog into a photo book considering different 

aesthetic requirements. Önduygu [48] developed the system Gráphagos that 

gener ates compositions through the interactive evolution of specific features of visual 

elements. Klein [49] developed the tool Crossing, Mixing, Mutating to create 

variations in a template using genetic operators. Later, an updated version of this tool 

was rel eased as an InDesign plug -in named Evolving Layout [50] . Lopes et al. [51] 

developed the system evoDesigner , which automatically creates and evolves designs 

in the InDesign environment. Recently, Machine Learning approaches have been 

employed in the layout design field taking into account the relation between elements 

on layout and the learning of specific typesetting and design styles, e.g. Zheng et al. 

[52] , Li et al. [53] , or Kikuchi et al. [54] .

Our analysis of the related work unveils a series of compu tational approaches that 

reveal great potential for the support and automatisation of the creation of book 

layouts. However, as far as we know, the existing approaches on this context rarely 

enable the subsequent modification of the generated designs, even less in the natural 

working environment of the designer. This way, it is difficult to introduce such 5

computational technologies in the design process in an easy and fluid fashion. Also, 

we denoted that most of these approaches do not present a multipurpos e objective, 

being developed to generate specific designs. 

# 3. System 

We developed a computer system to automatically typeset books from content 

provided by the user. This system is developed as a computer script that operates 

inside Adobe InDesign software wh ich is popular among graphic designers working 

in the field of typography. We idealised and implemented the system to take 

advantage of the typeset functionalities supplied with InDesign, which can be 

controlled via scripting. By integrating the system wit h InDesign, we allow users to 

generate design variations and easily edit them within a familiar working 

environment. One can find demonstration videos in the supplementary files. To install 

the system in the InDesign environment, the user only needs to cop y the folder that 

contains the system files to the scripts folder in the application directory. To facilitate 

access to the system, we also made available a script that creates a dedicated tab for 

the system in the InDesign navigation menu. The system inst allation files and source 

code are available at https://cdv.dei.uc.pt/2019/scriptedpages .1

In the following subsections, we describe the user interface of the system and explain 

how its engine works. 

2.1 Interface 

Figure 2 shows different snapshots of the user interface built to enable the interactive 

contr ol of the inner workings of the system. The user interface is structured in a series 

of five tabs. In each tab, one can set specific properties of the composition or let the 

system choose automatically based on a set of predefined rule -based values for tho se 

properties. 

The first interface tab “Document” (Figure 2a) concerns the structural characteristics 

of the document. It allows the user to set the page size, margins, number of columns 

and gutter. There is also an option to import settings stored in a file.   

> 1We also made available supplementary materials, including demonstration videos and examples of
> books designed with the proposed system. 6

In the second tab “Input” (Figure 2b), the user provides the content of the book to be 

typeset. To that end, the interface offers two options. The first option is to load a 

Microsoft Word file containing only text, text and images, or only images. Th e

second option is to load a Microsoft Word file containing only the text and a folder 

containing the images. For this second option, the place where each image should be 

inserted must be identified in the text using a tag @imageFileName@, which will be 

re placed by the image with the same name contained in the loaded folder. In addition, 

the user can choose whether to generate a table of contents and/or colophon for the 

book. The last option of this tab allows the user to select the language of the input 

te xt so that it is possible to correctly hyphenate words. 

The third tab “Styles” (Figure 2c) concerns the definition and mapping of paragraph 

styles. The user has three options to choose from. The first option is to keep the styles 

imported from the input Wo rd document. The second option is to map each style of 

the input document to another paragraph style selected, manually or randomly, from a 

list created from all fonts installed on the computer, while keeping the remaining 

paragraph attributes. The last op tion is to let the system generate the styles, 

suggesting font combinations based on the rules entered in the system (these rules are 

explained in the next subsection). 

In the fourth tab “Experimental” (Figure 2d), the user can toggle experimental 

features that can be applied to the generated book. In the presented version of the 

system, there are four experimental features: (i) draw a colour background on half of 

each book page; (ii) draw a colour gradient along the inner and/or outer margins of 

the pages; (iii) apply a random indentation to each text paragraph; and (iv) make the 

cover title as large as possible. The purpose of these features is to increase the 

uniqueness of the resulting designs. The user can also opt to let the system randomly 

choose if a ny experimental features should be applied by selecting the checkbox 

“Surprise me.” Furthermore, new features can be implemented and added to the 

system at any time. 

After interacting with these four tabs of settings, the user can start creating book 

desig ns by clicking on the button “Create” located at the bottom right corner of the 

interface. This button will start the engine of the system which will automatically 

create a new InDesign document and typeset a new book from the content and 

settings chosen b y the user. 

Once the typeset process is complete, the result is presented to the designer as an 

editable InDesign document. From that moment on, the user can, for instance: (i) 7

adopt the generated book as a final design; (ii) use the generated book as a st arting 

design from which the designer can make any changes or refinements needed; or (iii) 

continue to use the system to generate more designs until a more suitable design is 

found.  

> Figure 2. Snapshots of the system, showing the five different tabs of th e user interface: (a) Document,
> (b) Input, (c) Styles, (d) Experimental and (e) Properties. Demonstration videos of the system can be
> found in the supplementary files.

There is another interface tab, entitled “Properties” (Figure 2e), which not only 

overvi ews the settings used in the generation of a book but also enables the user to 

save those settings to a file. Later, this settings file can be imported to the system 

using the first interface tab, as mentioned earlier. This functionality can be useful, for 

example, to facilitate the typeset of different books using the same settings. This last 

tab is only accessible after a book is generated. After the generation, it is also made 8

visible a button that enables the user to generate a new book, maintaining the same 

input document and predefined settings. 

2.2 Engine 

The system operates based on a series of typographic rules, styles and principles 

(Table 1) which were identified and collected from literature recognised in the field. 

This includes the work by Bri nghurst [1] , Müller -Brockmann [55] , Haslam [56] ,

Hochuli and Kinross [2] , Hochuli [57] , Lupton [58] and Tschichold [59] . The 

encoding of these rules into the system, enables the typeset process to go through 

them, one by one, and make typographic decisions on all composition attributes. The 

rules are stored in a JSON file, which contains the possible configurations ( i.e. values 

or range of values) and, when applicable, their probability rate for each typographic 

attribute. This file enables easy access to a ll rules by the system and their quick 

editing by the designer at any time. 

Table 1 Typography rules, styles and principles loaded into the system by default 

Attribute Valid approaches or values Influenced by Based on 

Book type Short reading (<50 ,000 words) n/a Defined empirically 

based on examples Long reading (≥50 ,000 words) 

Only images 

Text and images 

Book Size and 

Format 

105 × 180 mm (portrait) Book type Defined empirically 

based on examples 110 × 170 mm (portrait) 

110 × 180 mm (portrait) 

110 × 220 mm (portrait) 

130 × 200 mm (portrait) 

150 × 210 mm (portrait) 

170 × 240 mm (portrait) 

180 × 180 mm (square) 

200 × 110 mm (landscape) 

200 × 120 mm (landscape) 

230 × 120 mm (landscape) 

Margins Defined randomly based on a certain 

range for each margin. 

Top and Bottom margins between 7 

mm and 15 mm. Inside and outside 

margins between 7 mm and 30mm. 

n/a Defined empirically 

based on examples 

Grid Defined based on a random column 

size value calculated based on a certain 

range. Column sizes vary between 70 

mm and 140 mm. 

Book size Müller -Brockmann [55] 

Line length Between 45 and 75 characters (the 

ideal is 66); ≥48 characters for justified 

text 

Grid: 

Alignment 

Bringhurst [1] 

Words per page/ 

Lines per page 

≤500 words (≈45 lines) for one column n/a Bringhurst [1] 

≤1.000 words for multiple columns 

Paragraph marks Ornaments Book type Bringhurst [1] 9

Drop lines (space before the paragraph) 

Paragraph marks 

Negative indent 

Positive indent 

Alignment Justified for long reading Book type Haslam [56] ; Lupton [58] 

Left align for long reading, titles and 

captions 

Right align for captions 

Centre align for titles 

Hyphenation Yes Alignment 

(required when 

justified) 

Bringhurst [1] 

No 

Leading Between 115% and 140% of the font 

size (the base value is 120%) 

Font size; Font 

painting 

Defined empirically 

based on examples 

Body font Serif for long reading Book type Bringhurst [1] 

Serif or sans -serif for short reading 

Title font Different or the same as the text, with 

another weight or in uppercase. 

Body font Hochuli and Kinross [2] ;

Hochuli [57] 

Font size Between 8 and 12 points Book type; Font Defined empirically 

based on examples 

Word spacing Between 80% and 120% (the ideal is 

100%) 

Required when 

justified 

Defined empirically 

based on examples 

Letter spacing Between -5% and 5% (the ideal is 0%) Required when 

justified 

Defined empirically 

based on examples 

Running header 

and page 

numbering 

Running header on top of the page and 

slightly indented from the left margins. 

Page numbering at top of the page and 

aligned with the right margins. 

Margins; Defined empirically 

based on examples 

Running header on the bottom of the 

page and centred with text block. 

Page numbering at bottom of the page 

and aligned with outer margins 

(slightly indented from the text block 

on the left page). 

Running header on top of the page and 

centred with text block. 

Page numbering at top of the page and 

aligned with outer margins (slightly 

indented from the text block on the left 

page). 

Running header on top of the page and 

centred with text block. 

Page numbering at bottom of the page 

and centred with text block. 

Running header rotated 90º and 

vertically centred in the middle of the 

space before the outer margin. 

Page numbering horizontally centred at 

the upper corner of the outer margin. 

Running header rotated 90º and 

vertically centred in the middle of the 

space before the outer margin. 

Page numbering horizontally centred at 

the upper corner of the inner margin. 

Following all the encoded typographic rules, the system performs the typesetting 

process in order to computationally design books. This process consists of seven 

different sequential steps: (i) Input processing; (ii) Document size and grid definition; 

(iii) Typeface definition; (iv) Typographic styles definition; (v) Document 10 

typesetting; (vi) Experimental features application; and (vii) Cover design. The next 

subsections further describe each step. 

2.2.1 Input Processing 

The first step is to load and process the content provided by the user. Once the 

content is loaded, the system analyses it and extracts data concerning, for example, 

the text length, number of images and proportion of text in relation to images. This 

data is important since it allows the system to determine the type of book that it is 

typesetting, that is, the extr acted data may indicate whether the task is to design a 

long reading book ( i.e. 50 ,000 words or more), a short reading book ( i.e. less than 

50 ,000 words), a text and images book, or a book that only contains images. This 

information, in turn, will enable t he system to make typographic decisions in the 

following steps of the typesetting process. 

2.2.2 Document Size and Grid Definition 

The next step is to create a new document with the page format and size based on the 

type of book. Thus, we encoded in the ty pographic styles, rules and principles a set of 

available book sizes as well as the probability of being selected for a certain book 

type. Then, the book size is selected at random based on those probability rates. 

In this step, the system also defines th e document grid, that is, the size of the margins, 

the number of columns, and the document baseline. Margins are defined randomly 

within a present range. The number of columns in the grid is calculated by dividing 

the width of the available text block by a random integer value chosen within a 

predefined range. Also, it considers the predefined minimum text block width. Thus, 

in small page sizes, it will only create one -column grids. 

The template pages are defined by creating the template text boxes and pla cing the 

running header (with section name) and page numbering. The section name of a page 

is the last title found in the input document file. The position and size of these 

elements are defined empirically based on observation and analysis of examples. 

Cu rrently, the system implements five different ways to compose the headers and 

page numbering. 

2.2.3 Typeface Definition 

Then, the system defines the typefaces to be used based on the preferences of the 

user, who can choose to (i) keep the typefaces used on the input document, (ii) map 

those typefaces to new ones installed on the computer, or (iii) let the system select the 

typefaces. 11 

When users decide to map the typefaces of the input document to new ones, they 

must define the style for each typeface using a font installed on their computers. 

Typefaces that are not for mapping are defined with the same typeface as in the input 

document. Additionally, users can determine that the system should map one, or 

more, typefaces at random. 

In the last option, the ty pefaces are selected from a set of pairs or combinations of 

fonts which are defined and encoded on the configuration file mentioned above. 

When selecting the fonts, the system considers the type of book ( e.g. long reading or 

short reading). Each font pair is composed of one typeface for the titles and another 

for the text body, along with other typographic features that are specific to each font. 

Table 2 presents the typeface pairing loaded into the system by default. 

Table 2. Typeface pairing data loaded i nto the system by default. 

Title font Body font Leading Book type 

BRRR bold (Swiss 

Typefaces, 2017) 

PS Fournier 

(Typofonderie, 2012) 

1.17 Long reading 

Founders Grotesk bold 

(Klim Type Foundry, 

2010) 

Arnhem regular (Fred 

Smeijers, 2002) 

1.25 Long reading 

Domain regular (Klim 

Type Foundry, 2013) 

1.20 Long reading 

Founders Grotesk 

regular (Klim Type 

Foundry, 2010) 

1.20 Short reading | Text and images 

Tiempos Regular 

(Klim Type Foundry, 

2010) 

1.20 Long reading 

Futura PT bold 

(Paratype, 1995) 

Didot regular 

(Linotype, 2009) 

1.30 Long reading | Text and images 

Sabon regular 

(Lynotype, 1964) 

1.28 Long reading 

Futura PT regular 

(Paratype, 1995) 

1.20 Short reading | Text and images | 

Only images 

Gill Sans bold 

(Monotype, 1928) 

Baskerville PT regular 

(ParaType, 2016) 

1.25 Long reading 

Perpetua regular 

(Monotype, 1925) 

1.16 Long reading 

Minion regular (Adobe, 

1990) 

1.28 Long reading 

Times New Roman 

regular (Monotype, 

1931) 

1.20 Long reading 12 

GT Walsheim 

Pro bold (Grilli Type, 

2009) 

Adobe Caslon regular 

(Adobe, 1990) 

1.20 Long reading 

Bembo regular 

(Monotype, 1929) 

1.20 Long reading 

Helvetica bold 

(Lynotype, 1957) 

Arno regular (Adobe, 

2007) 

1.16 Long reading 

Joanna regular 

(Monotype, 1931) 

1.22 Long reading 

Helvetica regular 

(Lynotype, 1957) 

1.20 Short reading | Text and images | 

Only images 

La Nord bold (Type 

Club Düsseldorf, 2017 )

Lyon Text regular 

(Commercial Type, 

2009) 

1.30 Long reading 

Arno regular (Adobe, 

2007) 

1.16 Long reading 

La Nord Regular (Type 

Club Düsseldorf, 2017) 

1.20 Short reading | Only images 

Neuzeit S bold 

(Linotype, 1959) 

Antwerp regular (A2 

Type, 2011) 

1.20 Long reading 

Proxima Nova bold 

(Mark Simonson 

Studio, 2005) 

Arnhem regular 

(Fred Smeijers, 2002) 

1.25 Long reading | Text and images 

FF Scala Sans bold 

(FontShop, 1990) 

Arno regular 

(Adobe, 2007) 

1.16 Long reading 

FF Scala Serif regular 

(FontShop, 1990) 

1.28 Long reading 

Univers bold 

(Linotype, 1957) 

Sabon regular 

(Monotype, 1967) 

1.28 Long reading 

Akkurat bold (Lineto, 

2004) 

Akkurat regular 

(Lineto, 2004) 

1.20 Short reading | Text and images | 

Only images 

Antique Olive bold 

(Linotype, 1960) 

Antique Olive regular 

(Linotype, 1960) 

1.20 Short reading | Only images 

Arnhem bold (Fred 

Smeijers, 2002) 

Arnhem regular (Fred 

Smeijers, 2002) 

1.25 Short reading | Text and images | 

Only images 

Fedra Sans bold 

(Typotheque, 2001) 

Fedra Sans regular 

(Typotheque, 2001) 

1.20 Short reading | Text and images | 

Only images 

ATF Franklin Gothic 

bold (ATF, 2019) 

ATF Franklin Gothic 

regular (ATF, 2019) 

1.20 Short reading | Text and images | 

Only images 

Scala Sans bold 

(FontShop, 1990) 

Arno regu lar 

(Adobe, 2007) 

1.16 Short reading | Only images 13 

2.2.4 Typographic Styles Definition 

The process continues with the definition of the paragraph, character and image 

styles. For each paragraph style, the following properties are defined: font, weight, 

size, leading, first line indentation, paragraph indentation, space before and after the 

paragraph, alignment, vertical alignment, hyphenation, language and co lour. 

The font, weight, text leading, language initial text size and colour are defined based 

on the preferences expressed beforehand by the user. The final text size is determined 

based on the chosen document grid. In this process, the system checks whet her the 

initial typeface size is within the limits defined by the loaded rules and then it 

composes a text box and confirms that its median number of characters per line is 

within a predefined range. When the median number of characters is lower or higher 

than the limits, the system decreases or increases the text size, respectively. This 

process will continue until a proper text size is reached. When those values are 

achieved, if yet necessary, the document grid is also modified, namely the margins 

area an d the number of columns. Finally, the first line indentation, paragraph 

indentation, space before and after the paragraph, text alignment, vertical alignment 

and hyphenation are defined at random based on the type of book. 

The character styles are then def ined based on the input document and the paragraph 

styles, which will be useful for using italics, bolds, small caps, among others. Also, 

the styles for the images are decided based on the input document and the paragraph 

style, thus determining their posi tioning, size, text wrap and effects. 

2.2.5 Document Typesetting 

Once the base document is created and all the styles are defined, the system proceeds 

to the actual typesetting of the book. It starts by typesetting the inside of the book. 

The typesetting o f the inside of the book includes a sequence of steps. First, the 

system positions the body text. Then, the typographic styles defined earlier are 

applied to the entire content of the document. 

The titles on the document are formatted considering three le vels of hierarchies 

defined based on their text size on the input document: (i) chapters titles, i.e. titles in 

the biggest size and preceded by a page break; (ii) section titles, i.e. titles in a size 

bigger than the main text font and preceded by a page or a column break; and (iii) 

subsection titles, i.e. titles in the same size that the body text. Chapter titles are 

composed isolated on one page. Section titles are typeset on the following page of the 

document. In multi -column documents, they are placed isolated on the first column; 14 

otherwise, they are placed at the beginning of the page. Subsection titles are 

composed inline on the text of the same size as body text. 

Once the typographic styles are applied, the images and the corresponding captions 

are c reated automatically. Initially, images are placed inline, with the same width as 

the column where they are placed. If the book has a multi -column grid and the image 

is placed on the leftmost column of the document, the system randomly decides 

whether to c hange its size to fulfil more than a column. The captions are created 

automatically based on the name of the input images. For each document, the system 

determines a caption style based on the available inner space on margins as well as 

the existence of he aders and page numbers. By default, captions can be placed below 

the images, aligned to the left, or aside the images, centred and vertically rotated 90º. 

Finally, the table of contents and colophon are created. As mentioned before, the 

system interface al lows the user to choose whether to create a table of contents and/or 

colophon. When these options are activated, a table of contents is created based on 

the titles on the input document and with the same paragraph style as the titles. On the 

other hand, th e colophon with information about the generated book is typeset at the 

end of the book in the same style as that body text. This information includes a 

description of this project and parametric details about the specific design of that 

book, such as size, margins, and the number of columns, among others. 

2.2.6 Experimental Features 

The use of experimental features is optionally and performed when selected by the 

user through the interface. As mentioned earlier, new features can be developed and 

added to th e system. The presented version of the system presents the following 

experimental features regarding the inside of the book. The first one draws a colour 

background on half of each book page, in a specific layer under the text. The second 

feature draws a g radient along the inner and/or outer margins of the pages. The 

margins where the gradient is drawn are defined randomly, being possible for the 

system to create gradients in both margins. In both experimental features, the 

background colour is defined rand omly based on a set of predefined colours, as soon 

as the first feature is used. By default, the set of colours includes the following seven 

CMYK colours: cyan (100,0,0,0); light orange (0,40,100,0); orange (0,60,100,0); red 

(0,100,100,0); pink (0,39,3,0); yellow (0,0,100,0); and beige (2,14,38,0). Finally, the 

last feature applies a random indentation to each text paragraph. 15 

2.2.7 Cover design 

The last step is the design of the book cover. We developed a method that generates 

simple typographic composition s with the title of the book (aligned to the top margin) 

and its author (aligned to the bottom margin) in uppercase letters and in the same font 

used in the text. The back cover includes information about the computer system that 

generated the book. The co ver background colour is randomly selected from a set of 

predefined colours. The book title and author(s) need to be defined in the input 

document using a specific paragraph style. Alternatively, when this information is not 

specified, the system automatic ally sets the title to the first sentence of the paragraph 

composed in the biggest text size in the input document. 

Experimental features also can be developed and applied to the covers. For instance, 

the presented version of the system includes experiment al features that typeset the 

cover title in the largest font size possible. 

# 4. Experimentation and Discussion 

We performed an experiment to assess if, and to what extent, the proposed system is 

able to automatically design book layouts with different purposes and styles. In 

particular, we are interested in studying the ability of the system to perform two 

design tasks: (i) create books with distinguishable layout designs, i.e. to generate a set 

of books that present varied visual characteristics; and (ii) create visually coherent 

books, i.e. to generate a collection of books that follow and share the same visual 

style between them. Therefore, we conducted a survey to assess the visual diversity 

and coher ence of designs created with the proposed system. 

The following subsections describe our experimentation process. First, we explain the 

conducted experiment. Then, we report and discuss the obtained results. 

3.1 Experimental Method 

For the evaluation of vi sual diversity, we performed the following actions. First, we 

selected one public domain book. Then, we input this content into the system and 

generated 15 books while not manually setting any visual or typography attribute, i.e. 

the attributes were define d at random by the system within the predefined ranges 

based on the typographic styles, rules and principles defined by default in the system 

(see Table 1). Lastly, we presented the 15 generated book designs to a group of 42 

participants and asked them to assess the layout diversity and/or coherence of the set. 16 

The selected content was the book “Contos” written by the Portuguese author Eça de 

Queiróz and published in 1992. 2 This book comprises thirteen short stories, each one 

structured as a chapter, compo sed of about 73.330 words. 

For the evaluation of visual coherence, we proceeded as follows. First, we selected a 

book from the set of 15 generated earlier to evaluate diversity. Then, we exported to 

file the settings used by the system to generate the sele cted book. Table 3 overviews 

the visual and typographic features of the chosen book design. Next, we input these 

settings into the system and created book designs for 5 different contents. Lastly, we 

presented the 5 generated designs to the same group of p articipants and asked them to 

evaluate the layout diversity and/or coherence of this set.   

> Table 3. System settings employed to generate the book designs used in the second part of the
> experiment, where their visual coherence is evaluated
> Page size
> (width × height)
> 130 mm × 200 mm
> Page margins
> (top | inside | bottom | outside)
> 12 mm | 12 mm |
> 13.7 mm | 22 mm
> Running header and page
> numbering position
> Top page margin
> Grid
> (columns number | gutter size)
> 1 | n/a
> Title
> (typeface | size | leading)
> La Nord (Raoul Gottschling, 2006) | 24 pt | 27 pt
> Title alignment
> (text box alignment on page | text
> alignment)
> Top page margin | centre
> Body text
> (typeface | font size | leading)
> Antwerp (A2 Type, 2011) | 10 pt | 13 pt
> Body text alignment
> (text alignment | hyphenisation)
> justify | hyphenation on
> Cover colour CMYK (2, 14, 38, 0)
> Experimental features none

The two sets of books were evaluated by the same group of testing participants 

through a survey. First, we presented to the participants a set of 15 designs generated 

at random and then a new set of 5 designs generated using the settings of one design 

sele cted from the first set. After observing each set of designs, each participant was 

asked to classify its layout diversity and/or coherence on a scale between 1 (very  

> 2The book “Contos” by Eça de Queirós was retrieved from the Project Gutenberg. One may download
> the book at the following address www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/31347 (visited: 26 Jul y 2022). 17

coherent) and 5 (very diverse). As already mentioned, the testing group includes 42 

indivi duals. The age of the participants ranged from 19 to 49 years old. 

3.2 Results and Discussion  

> Figure 3. Examples of pages from books designed by the system using random settings and used in the
> first part of the experiment to assess their visual divers ity. All designs generated by the system for this
> paper can be found in the supplementary files.

Figure 3 presents several pages composed automatically by the system for the first 

part of the experiment, where the visual settings are defined at random. Loo king at 

the resulting designs, we noticed that most of the designs (12 out of 15) are portrait -

oriented. This is due to the automatic classification of the input content by the system 

as a long reading book and therefore the probability of selecting a port rait format is 

higher. Nevertheless, the format of the generated books exhibits slight variations 

between them. Concerning the text box, the grids and the typefaces used, we noticed 

the influence of the typographic principles and rules encoded in the syste m. Most 

designs present the body text typeset in the justified text (13 out of 15) over a one -

column grid (12 out of 15), which are characteristics considered suitable for long 

reading books. Nevertheless, it is possible to observe diversity in other aspec ts. The 

dimensions of the margins and the size of the grid gutter, when it exists, vary between 

books. The used font, text size and leading and position of the running and page 

numbers also change. Additionally, it is possible to observe that different 

exp erimental features were used, alone or combined, in 6 of the generated designs. 18 

Observing books created when the system settings are imported from a previously 

generated book, we can notice the share of visual characteristics among the resulting 

designs ( e.g. book format and size, page margins, grid or used typefaces) and their 

similarity to the initial design. Figure 4 shows pages from the book that sourced the 

settings file (Figure 4a), which was selected from the set used in the first part of t he 

experiment (Figure 3), along with pages of some books used in the second part of the 

experiment (Figure 4b). One should note that Figure 3 and Figure 4 depict only a 

small portion of the designs generated for the experiment, which can be all consulted 

in the supplementary files.   

> Figure 4. Examples of pages from books designed by the system using the same settings. The top row of
> pages (a) belongs to a book selected from the set used in the first part of the experiment. The other two
> rows of pages (b) b elong to two books of the set used in the second part of the experiment, generated
> using the settings sourced by the book selected from the first set (a). All designs generated by the system
> for this paper can be found in the supplementary files.

The conducted survey indicates that the system is able to generate both diverse and 

cohesive book designs. The chart in Figure 5 shows the distribution of answers 

obtained in the survey. 

When we asked the survey participants to classify the diversity and/o r coherence of 

the first set of books, which were generated at random by the system, the majority of 

participants (35 out of 42) considered them as diverse (19 participants) or very 

diverse (16 participants). Only a few participants considered that this se t of books 

was very cohesive (2 participants) or cohesive (5 participants). When participants 

performed the same task for the second set of books, which were generated from a 

specific settings file, the majority of participants (38 out of 42) considered th at the 

generated designs were visually coherent between them. Most of them (30 19 

participants) considered that this second set of designs present a high -level coherence 

among them.   

> Figure 5. Distribution of the answers obtained in the user survey conducted to evaluate the visual
> coherency and diversity of different books generated by the system. Black bars regard user evaluations
> of books created using random settings chosen automatically by the system. Grey bars regard user
> evaluations of books created usi ng the same settings imported from a selected settings file.

The survey results revealed that variables and properties defined by the system can 

create visually diverse layouts. Although the system engine determines the features of 

books based on a set of predefined typographic rules and principles, it also employs 

probabilistic mechanisms to define some attributes. This allows the occasional 

definition of attributes in an unexpected manner, promoting visual variation on the 

resulting layouts. This is visib le, for instance, in the first part of the experiment, 

where books are created with the different formats even though the system tends to 

avoid the use of landscape format in long reading. 

The obtained results expose the exploratory nature of the proposed system, which 

demonstrates high potential to stimulate and foster graphic designers' creativity and 

experimentation in the different stages of the design process. The system presents 

itself as a co -creativity tool which enables editorial designers to explo re multiple 

conceptual and visual possibilities in an accessible, easy, and effortless manner. This 

is possible by enabling users to not only define values of the different attributes but 

also by enabling them to define the level of autonomy of the system and/or target the 

exploration of certain properties. Therefore, the system can be used in most stages of 

the design process, from the earlier and exploratory stages (when designers can take 20 

advantage of random generation to look for new types of layouts) t o the final stages 

(when designers need to fine -tune one or more graphic attributes). 

The system allows exporting data to settings files that encode the design of the book 

and, later, can be loaded into the system to create other books which are visually 

similar. As demonstrated by the survey results, the proposed system can 

automatically create highly coherent designs when the book properties and 

characteristics are prior determined and stored in these settings files. Users can also 

include in the system t heir desired book properties both directly on the system 

interface and/or by modifying the typographic principles and rules used by the 

system. The proposed system is also a useful tool to automate the design of books 

that need to follow a set of restricte d typographic and visual attributes ( e.g. when it is 

necessary to design new books that will be part of a collection or a series). Thus, 

besides its exploratory nature, the system also enables the automatisation of some 

editorial design tasks and routines. 

With the proposed system, users do not require other software tools to manipulate and 

produce the resulting book designs since it operates inside of the popular editorial 

design software Adobe InDesign and the generated books are made available as 

editabl e documents. This way, it is fully integrated into the typical working 

environment of editorial designers. This allows its use both as an exploratory and as 

an automation tool, thus empowering designers to easily edit or fine -tune the output 

designs direct ly in a familiar environment. 

The experimental features implemented by the system can be observed in some of the 

generated books and definitely contribute to their diversity and variation. 

Nevertheless, we noted that some generated designs exhibit certain graphic 

limitations. This may be related to the fact that the generated designs comply with the 

same default typographic rules and principles. Although users can manipulate these 

rules, this will primarily change the typeset of the book but it will not inc lude new 

visual features. For this reason, the system facilitates the addition of new features as 

well as their control. In this sense, one can add new features to the system for 

exploration and automatisation purposes. We believe that this possibility may allow 

the system to solve some lack of distinguishable visual features of the output, 

including in the design of the covers. 

In summary, the experimental results demonstrate the ability of the proposed system 

to automatically generate finished and functio nal designs from scratch. Furthermore, 

the results reveal the potential of the system as a useful exploratory tool in the context 21 

of book typesetting and editorial design. It may be operated by graphic designers 

when they are searching and exploring new co nceptual and visual perspectives, fine -

tune a book characteristic, and/or design books that must be coherent with a given set 

of typographic rules. In addition, we consider that the automation provided by the 

system has great potential in varied graphic de sign commercial scenarios, e.g. the 

automatic design and production of customised books, which is relevant for print -on -

demand applications, or the effortless typeset of books for an existing one -book 

collection. 

# 5. Conclusion 

We have presented a novel approa ch to computationally design books. The presented 

system implements a generative design process which takes advantage of the 

scripting capabilities of Adobe InDesign to procedurally typeset books from content 

provided by the user. We have shown the ability of the system to (i) create book 

designs that consistently comply with a series of typographic rules, styles and 

principles identified in the literature; (ii) produce visually diversified books from the 

same input content; and (iii) produce visually coher ent books with different contents. 

The work presented in the paper may challenge the typical roles of both the tool and 

the designer. First, by automatically creating and suggesting design alternatives, the 

tool ends up playing a more active role in the de sign process. Then, by modifying and 

developing custom tools, the designer is no longer a mere tool user and becomes the 

author of tools tailored to specific needs. We believe this shift can be fruitful since it 

enables the exploration and discovery of new technical and creative possibilities. 

This work can hopefully provide directions to further research on generative 

processes for supporting design exploration and finding unique designs. In the 

particular case of typography, generative approaches such as the one presented in the 

paper can be useful and reveal great potential, especially in the current print -on -

demand market and digital publishing, where each publication may be unique. 

Our future work will move in the direction of employing Artificial Intel ligence 

techniques, such as Evolutionary Computation and Machine Learning, to enable a 

deeper exploration of the vast space of book designs that can be achieved with the 

system and also to automatically suggest settings to designers according to their 

need s or goals. 22 

# 6. Acknowledgments 

We would like to express our gratitude to all the participants in the evaluation 

sessions. This work is partially supported by the Foundation for Science and 

Technology, I.P./MCTES (Portugal) through national funds (PIDDAC), wit hin the 

scope of project UIDB/00326/2020 or project code UIDP/00326/2020 . Sérgio M. 

Rebelo was funded by FCT under the grant SFRH/BD/132728/2017 and 

COVID/BD/151969/2021. 

# References 

[1] R. Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style, 2nd ed., Hartley & Marks 

Publishers, Vancouver, 1997. 

[2] J. Hochuli, R. Kinross, Designing Books: Practice and Theory, Hyphen Press, 

London, 2004. 

[3] D. Ferreira, Design Editorial Algorítmico, M .Sc . dissertation , University of Coimbra, 

2019. 

[4] H. Armstrong, Giving Form to the Future, in: Digital Design Theory: Readings From 

the Field, Princeton Architectural Press, New York, 2016. 

[5] P.B. Meggs, A.W. Purvis, Meggs’ History of Graphic Design, 6th ed., John Wiley & 

Sons, Inc., Hoboken, 2016. 

[6] C. Reas, C. McWilliams, LUST, Form + Code in Design, Art, and Architecture, 

Princeton Architectural Press, New York, 2010. 

[7] K. Gerstner, Designing Programmes, Lars Müller Publishers, Baden, 2019. 

[8] K. Gerstner, Compendium for Literates: A System of Wr iting, MIT Press, 

Cambridge, 1974. 

[9] F. Cramer, Concepts, Notations, Software, Art, in: Seminar Für Allgemeine Und 

Vergleichende Literaturwissenschaft , Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, 2002. 

https://cramer.pleintekst.nl/all/concept_notations_software_art (accessed August 3, 

2022). 

[10] D.E. Knuth, M.F. Plass, Breaking Paragraphs into Lines, Softw Pract Exp. 11 (1981) 

1119 –1184. https://doi.org/10.1002/spe.4380111102 .

[11] D.E. Knuth, The Concept of a Meta -Font, Visible Lang. 16 (1982) 3 –27. 

[12] D.E. Knuth, D.R. Bibby, The TeXbook, 20th ed., Addison -Wesley Publishing 

Company, Reading, 1991. 

[13] J.F. Musgrave, M.R. Cooper, Experiments in Digital Graphic Design, IBM Systems 

Journal. 35 (1996) 499 –513. https://doi.org/10.1147/sj.353.0499 .23 

[14] M.R. Cooper, Computers and Design, Design Quarterly. 1 (1989 ) 1+4 -31. 

[15] J. Maeda, Maeda @ Media , Thames & Hudson, London, 2000. 

[16] M.A. Boden, E.A. Edmonds, What is Generative Art?, Digital Creativity. 20 (2009) 

21 –46. https://doi.org/10.1080/14626260902 867915 .

[17] P. Galanter, Generative Art Theory, in: C. Paul (Ed.), A Companion to Digital Art, 

John Wiley & Sons Inc., Hoboken, 2016: pp. 146 –181. 

[18] A. Richardson, Data -driven Graphic Design: Creative Coding for Visua l

Communication, Bloomsbury Publishing Plc, London, 2016. 

[19] S.M. Rebelo, T. Martins, J. Bicker, P. Machado, Exploring Automatic Fitness 

Evaluation for Evolutionary Typesetting, in: C. Sas, N.A.M. Maiden, B.P. Bailey, C. 

Latulipe, E. Yi -Luen Do (Eds.), C &C ’21: Creativity and Cognition Virtual Event 

Italy June 22 - 23, 2021, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 2021: pp. 

1–9. https://doi.org/10.1145/3450741.3465247 .

[20] S. Guo, Z. Jin, F. Sun, J. Li, Z. Li, Y. Shi, N. Cao, Vinci: An Intelligent Graphic 

Design System for Generating Advertising Posters, in: Proceedings of the 2021 CHI 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Association for Computing 

Machinery, New York, 2021: Article No.: 577. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445117 .

[21] R. Gatarski, Breed better banners: Design automation through on -line interac tion, 

Journal of Interactive Marketing. 16 (2002) 2 –13. https://doi.org/10.1002/dir.10002 .

[22] W. Yin, T. Mei, C.W. Chen, Automatic Generation of Social Media Snippets for 

Mobile Browsing, in: Proceedings of the 21st ACM International Conference on 

Multimedia, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2013: pp. 

927 –936. https://doi.org/10.1145/2502081.25021 16 .

[23] J.C. Quiroz, S.J. Louis, A. Shankar, S.M. Dascalu, Interactive Genetic Algorithms for 

User Interface Design, in: 2007 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, 2007: 

pp. 1366 –1373. https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC.2007.4424630 .

[24] S. Amitani, Z. Bilda, E. Edmonds, Our Content: Generative Montage Methods for 

Multimedia Data, Des Stud. 29 (2008) 572 –586. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.destu d.2008.07.007 .

[25] G. Levin, Interactive Logographs, Flong. 

http://flong.com/archive/projects/logos/index.html , 2001 (a ccessed August 3, 2022). 

[26] Neue, Visit Nordkyn, Neue. (2010). https://neue.no/work/visit -nordkyn/ (accessed 

August 3, 2022). 

[27] Y. Ahn, G. Jin, TYPE+CODE II: A Code -Driven Typography, Leonardo. 49 (2016) 

168. https://doi.org/10.1162/LEON_a_01062 .24 

[28] T. Martins, J. Correia, E. Costa, P. Machado, Evotype: Towards the Evolution of 

Type Stencils, in: A. Liapis, J.J. Romero Cardalda, A. Ekárt (Eds.), Computational 

Intel ligence in Music, Sound, Art and Design, Springer International Publishing, 

Cham, 2018: pp. 299 –314. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319 -77583 -8_2 .

[29] L. Zeller, B . Groß, T. Davis, basil.js – Bridging Mouse and Code Based Design 

Strategies, in: A. Marcus (Ed.), Design, User Experience, and Usability. Theories, 

Methods, and Tools for Designing the User Experience, Springer International 

Publishing, Cham, 2014: pp. 68 6–696. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319 -07668 -

3_66 .

[30] The Magic Book Project, The Magic Book Project, 

https://github.com/magicbookproject/magicbook , 2020 (accessed August 3, 2022). 

[31] D. Barrett, E. van Blokland, M. Bruinsma, G. Hadders, J. Middendorp, J. van 

Rossum, P. di Sciullo, I. Schwartz, T. Triggs, LettError . Erik van Blokland & Just 

van Rossum, Drukkerij Rosbeek, Nuth, 2000. 

[32] J. Middendorp, LettError, or the ghost in the machine, in: Dutch Type, Druk Editions, 

Berlim, 2018: pp. 209 –219. 

[33] J.B.S. de Oliveira, Two Algorithms for Automatic Document Page Layout, in: 

Proceedings of the Eighth ACM Symposium on Document Engineering, Association 

for Computing Machinery, New York, 2008: pp. 141 –149. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/1410140.1410170 .

[34] P. Cleveland, Style Based Automated Graphic Layouts, Des Stud. 31 (2010) 3 –25. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2009.06.003 .

[35] N.P. Maffei, E -Book, iBook, weBook, youBook: Declensions of digital design, in: G. 

Lees -Maffei, N.P. Maffei, Rea ding Graphic Design in Cultural Context, Bloomsbury 

Publishing Plc. , London, 2019: pp. 207 –220. 

https://doi.org/10.5040/9781474293808.0020 .

[36] N. Damera -Venkata, J. Bento, E. O’Brien -Strain, Probabilistic Document Model for 

Automated Document Composition, in: Proceedings of the 11th ACM Symposium on 

Document Engineering, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 2011: pp. 

3–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/2034691.2034695 .

[37] I. Ahmadullin, N. Damera -Venkata, Hierarchical Probabilistic Model for News 

Composition, in: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM Symposium on Document 

Engineeri ng, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 2013: pp. 141 –150. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/2494266.2494276 .

[38] C. Ying, Automating Layouts Bring Flipboard’s Maga zine Style To Web And 

Windows, Tech Crunch. https://techcrunch.com/2014/03/23/layout -in -flipboard -for -

web -and -windows/ , 2014 (acces sed August 3, 2022). 25 

[39] J. Geigel, A.C.P. Loui, Automatic page layout using genetic algorithms for electronic 

albuming, in: G.B. Beretta, R. Schettini (Eds.), Internet Imaging II, SPIE, 2000: pp. 

79 – 90. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.411879 .

[40] E. Goldenberg, Automatic Layout of Variable -content Print Data, MSc Dissertation, 

University of Sussex, 2002. 

[41] J. González, I. Rojas, H. Pomares, M. Salmerón, J.J. Merelo, Web Ne wspaper Layout 

Optimization Using Simulated Annealing, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 

Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics). 32 (2002) 686 –691. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMCB.2002.1033189 .

[42] L. Purvis, S. Harrington, B. O’Sullivan, E.C. Freuder, Creating Personalized 

Documents: an Optimization Approach, in: Proceedings of the 2003 ACM 

Symposium on Document Engineering, ACM, New York , 2003: pp. 68 –77. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/958220.958234 .

[43] J.C. Quiroz, A. Banerjee, S.J. Louis, S.M. Dascalu, Document Design with 

Interactive Evolution, in: E. Damiani, J. Jeong, R.J. Howlett, L.C. Jain (Eds.), New 

Directions in Intelligent Interactive Multimedia Systems and Services, Springer -

Verlag, Heidelberg, 2009: pp. 309 –319. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642 -02937 -

0_28 .

[44] T. Strecker, L. Hennig, Automatic Layouting of P ersonalized Newspaper Pages, in: 

Fleischmann Bernhard, K. -H. Borgwardt, R. Klein, A. Tuma (Eds.), Operations 

Research Proceedings 2008, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009: 

pp. 469 –474. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642 -00142 -0_76 .

[45] S. Boll, P. Sandhaus, A. Scherp, U. Westermann, Semantics, Content, and Structure 

of Many for the Creation of Personal Photo Albums, in: Proceedings of the 15th 

ACM International Conference on Multimedia, ACM , New York, 2007: pp. 641 –650. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/1291233.1291385 .

[46] P. Sandhaus, M. Rabbath, S. Boll, Employing Ae sthetic Principles for Automatic 

Photo Book Layout, in: K. -T. Lee, W. -H. Tsai, H. -Y.M. Liao, T. Chen, J. -W. Hsieh, 

C. -C. Tseng (Eds.), Advances in Multimedia Modeling, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 

Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011: pp. 84 –95. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642 -17832 -0_9 .

[47] P. Sandhaus, M. Rabbath, I. Erbis, S. Boll, Blog2Book: Transforming Blogs into 

Photo Books Employing Aesthetic Principles, in: Proceedin gs of the 18th ACM 

International Conference on Multimedia, ACM , New York, 2010: pp. 1555 –1556. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/1873951.1874283 .

[48] D.C. Önduygu, Graphagos: E volutionary Algorithm as a Model for the Creative 

Process and as a Tool to Create Graphic Design Products, MA dissertation, Sabancı 

University, 2010. 26 

[49] D. Klein, Crossing, Mixing, Mutation, Archive of Gutenberg Intermedia Master 

Programme of Mainz Unive rsity of Applied Sciences. http://www.gutenberg -

intermedia.de/en/wissenschaft -gestaltung/denis -klein -crossing -mixing -mutation/ ,

2012 (accessed August 4, 2022). 

[50] LESS, Evolving Layout, LESS Studio Website .

https://web.archive.org/web/20200224095533/http://www.evolvinglayo ut.com/ , 2016 

(accessed August 4, 2022). 

[51] D. Lopes, J. Correia, P. Machado, EvoDesigner : Towards Aiding Creativity 

in Graphic Design, in: Martins Tiago, N. Rodríguez -Fernández, S.M. Rebelo (Eds.), 

Artificial Intelligence in Music, Sound, Art and Design, Springer International 

Publishing, Cham, 2022: pp. 162 –178. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031 -03789 -

4_11 .

[52] X. Zheng, X. Qiao, Y. Cao, R.W.H. Lau, Content -Aware Generative Modeling of 

Graphic Design Layouts, ACM Trans Graph. 38 (2019) 1 -15 (Article no. 13). 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3306346.3322971 .

[53] J. Li, J. Yang, A. Hertzmann, J. Zhang, T. Xu, LayoutGAN: Synthesizing Graphic 

Layouts With Vector -Wireframe A dversarial Networks, IEEE Trans Pattern Anal 

Mach Intell. 43 (2021) 2388 –2399. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2019.2963663 .

[54] K. Kikuchi, E. Simo -Serra, M. Otani, K. Yamaguchi, Constrained Graphic Layout 

Generation via Latent Optimization, in: Proceedings of the 29th ACM International 

Conference on Multimedia, ACM , New York, 2021: pp. 88 –96. 

https://doi.org/10.1 145/3474085.3475497 .

[55] J. Müller -Brockmann, Grid Systems in Graphic Design: A Visual Communication 

Manual for Graphic Designers, Typographers, and Three Dimensional Designers, 

Niggli Verlag, Zurich, 1981. 

[56] A. Hasl am, Book Design, Laurence King Publishing, London, 2006. 

[57] J. Hochuli, Detail in Typography, Hyphen Press, London, 2008. 

[58] E. Lupton, Thinking with Type: A Critical Guide for Designers, Writers, Editors, & 

Students, 2nd ed., Princeton Architectural Press, New York, 2014. 

[59] J. Tschichold, The Form of the Book: Essays on the Morality of Good Design, 

Hartley & Marks Publishers, Vancouver, 1991.
```
